Sometimes a memory is a clear and fixed point. Salient in a place, a feeling or a person. This is the first and most common way we talk about memory and it's usually what I'm trying to communicate when I use the word. My life is full of these declarative recollections; they make up my day-to-day and they are my most treasured possessions. But if I had to point to something that could explain my inner life, I would have to point elsewhere, to memory's second territory. It's an experience we all share, but because it doesn't ask to be noticed, I think it's best described through example.

Imagine you are visiting your family and you're in your childhood home. You open the front door and step outside to take a walk. Maybe some things have changed, but for the most part everything is familiar. You think about your family; you think about food and maybe laundry. You just happen to think about these things, neither wanting to nor not wanting to; in a way they reflect the path of your walk, automatic and routine. It's only when you go a little further than usual that declarative memories begin to surface. You look down a street you almost never walk down and remember the friend you had for one summer, and how he lived on the block you're looking at but you never went inside his house. Maybe you pass a restaurant you only went to one time, and that experience sits clearly in its singularity. As you return home, the stories once again fade away, replaced by familiar textures rather than the singular episodes in montage. You take out your keys and you go back inside.

While the experience of the singular memories seems more vivid on the surface, I would argue that the subconscious and often unnoticed texture of the familiar offers a deeper pool for reflection. Because there is so much information, because so much has happened, good and bad, the psychic landscape escapes the bounds of story and often escapes the bounds of our day-to-day awareness. But that doesn't mean it's not emotional. I would argue that the emotions surrounding what we no longer clearly remember are really what makes up the substrate from which our personalities arise.

I have been thinking about this more often because I grew up in NYC, but up until a few months ago I had never lived here as an adult. So, just for a little bit, the city in which I was born and raised has held feelings of familiarity and alienation at the same time. This small distance has shed just enough of a different light to allow me to see the texture of places where I have so many memories that they are no longer distinct. It's an awareness and a feeling that is already going away, but I hope I can still notice it from time to time because I know that inside of it is the center of my heart.
